Captioning sponsored by
MacNEIL/LEHRER PRODUCTIONS
>> Sreenivasan: RUSSIAN
PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN SAID
HE'LL RESPECT THIS WEEKEND'S
PRESIDENTIAL BALLOTING IN
UKRAINE, BUT PRO-MOSCOW
MILITANTS WERE STILL FIGHTING IN
THE EAST, AGAINST FORCES LOYAL
TO KIEV.
MARGARET WARNER IS IN THE
CAPITAL.
GOOD EVENING, I'M HARI
SREENIVASAN.
JUDY WOODRUFF IS AWAY.
ALSO AHEAD, THE WIDENING RACIAL
GAP IN SURVIVAL RATES FROM
BREAST CANCER.
AND WHAT HEALTH OIA
CITY ARE DOING, TO MAKE SURE
MORE BLACK WOMEN FIGHTING THE
DISEASE GET THE TREATMENT THEY
NEED.
>> I'M TRYING TO GET A PERSON
FROM A, TO B, TO C, TO D.
I'M NOT GOING TO LEAVE YOU,
UNTIL WE KNOW WHAT HAS TO BE
DONE FOR YOU.
SO YOU NEED TO GO IN EARLY, AND
I NEED TO STAY WITH YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: AND IT'S FRIDAY,
MARK SHIELDS AND MICHAEL GERSON
ARE HERE TO ANALYZE THE WEEK'S
NEWS.
THOSE ARE JUST SOME OF THE
STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Sreenivasan: THE EMBATTLED
SECRETARY OF VETERANS AFFAIRS,
ERIC SHINSEKI, WON SUPPORT TODAY
FROM A FELLOW CABINET MEMBER,
AMID A GROWING SCANDAL.
DEFENSE SECRETARY CHUCK HAGEL
SAID IT IS PREMATURE TO TALK OF
FIRING SHINSEKI OVER ALLEGATIONS
OF DELAYED CARE AT V.A.
HOSPITALS.
HE TOLD "C.B.S. NEWS" THE FOCUS
SHOULD BE ON HOW TO FIX THE
PROBLEM.
THERE HAVE BEEN GROWING DEMANDS
FROM BOTH REPUBLICANS AND
DEMOCRATS FOR SHINSEKI TO
RESIGN.
SECRETARY HAGEL ALSO URGED THE
NEWEST CROP OF NAVY AND MARINE
OFFICERS TODAY TO LEAD THE FIGHT
AGAINST SEXUAL ABUSE IN THE
MILITARY.
HE ADDRESSED THE U.S. NAVAL
ACADEMY COMMENCEMENT AND NOTED
THREE NAVY FOOTBALL PLAYERS HAD
BEEN ACCUSED, AT ONE POINT, OF
ASSAULTING A FEMALE CLASSMATE,
WHO GRADUATED TODAY.
>> YOU'VE SEEN WHAT THESE CRIMES
DO TO THE SURVIVORS, THEIR
FAMILIES, INSTITUTIONS AND
COMMUNITIES.
YOU KNOW HOW THEY TEAR PEOPLE
AND UNITS APART.
WE'RE ALL ACCOUNTABLE.
FROM NEW RECRUITS TO FOUR-STAR
ADMIRALS AND GENERALS.
FROM SECOND LIEUTENANTS TO THE
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE.
WE ALL HAVE TO STEP UP AND TAKE
ACTION WHEN WE SEE SOMETHING
THAT HURTS OUR PEOPLE AND OUR
VALUES.
>> Sreenivasan: HAGEL ALSO TOLD
THE GRADUATES THEY'LL NEED TO
LEAD PEOPLE SUFFERING FROM
MENTAL HEALTH PROBLEMS FROM THE
IRAN AND AFGHAN WARS.
HE SAID THOSE VETERANS SHOULD BE
EMBRACED, NOT STIGMATIZED.
THAILAND'S MILITARY TIGHTENED
ITS GRIP ON THE COUNTRY TODAY.
OUSTED PRIME MINISTER YINGLUCK
SHINAWATRA WAS SUMMONED BY THE
MILITARY CHIEF, AND THEN
DETAINED.
AND, MORE THAN 150 POLITICAL
LEADERS WERE BARRED FROM LEAVING
THE COUNTRY.
LATER, SOLDIERS MOVED IN AND
BROKE UP A LARGE CROWD THAT
GATHERED IN THE CENTER OF
BANGKOK TO PROTEST THE COUP.
THE ARMY SEIZED POWER YESTERDAY
AFTER MONTHS OF POLITICAL
UNREST.
IN RESPONSE TODAY, THE UNITED
STATES SUSPENDED $3.5 MILLION IN
MILITARY AID TO THAILAND.
CHINA WARNED JAPAN TODAY TO STAY
OUT OF A GROWING ROW IN THE
SOUTH CHINA SEA.
THE JAPANESE PRIME MINISTER,
SHINZO ABE, HAD CRITICIZED CHINA
FOR MOVING A GIANT OIL RIG INTO
WATERS THAT VIETNAM CLAIMS.
BEIJING REJECTED ABE'S
STATEMENT, SAYING IT, "NEGLECTS
REALITY AND CONFUSES THE FACTS."
IN SYRIA, GOVERNMENT T.V.
REPORTED 39 PEOPLE DIED AND 200
WERE HURT WHEN A MORTAR SHELL
HIT AN ELECTION RALLY FOR
PRESIDENT BASHAR AL-ASSAD.
IT HAPPENED OVERNIGHT IN THE
SOUTHERN CITY OF DARAA.
ASSAD WAS NOT THERE, BUT SCORES
OF PEOPLE WERE WOUNDED.
MEANWHILE, OPPOSITION ACTIVISTS
RELEASED THIS VIDEO ALLEGEDLY
SHOWING A CHLORINE GAS ATTACK
YESTERDAY, AT A VILLAGE NORTH OF
DAMASCUS.
THE ASSAD REGIME DENIES USING
CHEMICAL WEAPONS.
>> Sreenivasan: PRESIDENT OBAMA
ANNOUNCED A NEW SHUFFLE IN HIS
CABINET TODAY.
HE NOMINATED HOUSING SECRETARY
SHAUN DONOVAN TO HEAD THE WHITE
HOUSE OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND
BUDGET.
AND HE TAPPED THREE-TERM SAN
ANTONIO MAYOR, JULIAN CASTRO, AS
DONOVAN'S SUCCESSOR AT THE
DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN
DEVELOPMENT.
>> I AM ABSOLUTELY CONFIDENT
THAT THESE TWO INDIVIDUALS ARE
GOING TO DO A GREAT JOB BECAUSE
THEY'VE DONE A GREAT JOB IN
EVERYTHING THAT THEY'VE DONE IN
THE PAST.
THEY ARE PROVEN LEADERS.
THEY'RE PROVEN MANAGERS.
THEY'RE GOING TO BE EFFECTIVE
AND, MOST IMPORTANTLY, THEY'VE
GOT HUGE HEART.
THEY'RE INVOLVED IN PUBLIC
SERVICE FOR THE RIGHT REASONS.
>> Sreenivasan: THE TWO
NOMINATIONS ARE SUBJECT TO
SENATE CONFIRMATION.
THE MOST SENIOR BLACK LAWMAKER
IN CONGRESS, JOHN CONYERS, IS
BACK ON THE BALLOT IN MICHIGAN.
A FEDERAL JUDGE ORDERED TODAY
THAT THE VETERAN DEMOCRAT'S NAME
WILL APPEAR FOR THE AUGUST
PRIMARY.
STATE ELECTIONS OFFICIALS HAD
RULED CONYERS INELIGIBLE BECAUSE
OF PROBLEMS WITH HIS NOMINATING
PETITIONS.
HE'S BEEN IN THE HOUSE SINCE
1965.
WALL STREET HAD A RELATIVELY
QUIET DAY, GOING INTO THE
MEMORIAL DAY WEEKEND.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED 63 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
16,606.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 31 POINTS TO
CLOSE WELL OVER 4,185.
AND THE S-AND-P 500 ADDED EIGHT,
TO FINISH ABOVE 1,900 FOR THE
FIRST TIME.
FOR THE WEEK, THE DOW GAINED
JUST OVER HALF A PERCENT.
THE NASDAQ ROSE MORE THAN 2%.
THE S-AND-P WAS UP 1%.
STILL TO COME ON THE NEWSHOUR:
MORE BLOODSHED IN UKRAINE AHEAD
OF A KEY WEEKEND ELECTION;
A CLOSER LOOK AT AMERICA'S
CRUMBLING MENTAL HEALTH SYSTEM;
EFFORTS TO CLOSE RACIAL GAPS IN
BREAST CANCER SURVIVAL RATES;
MARK SHIELDS AND MICHAEL GERSON
ON THE WEEK'S NEWS;
PLUS: ONE AUTHOR'S TAKE ON "WHY
PHILOSOPHY WON'T GO AWAY" IN OUR
DIGITAL SOCIETY.
>> Sreenivasan: IT WAS ANOTHER
DEADLY DAY IN EASTERN UKRAINE
AHEAD OF SUNDAY'S ELECTIONS.
MEANWHILE, RUSSIAN PRESIDENT
VLADIMIR PUTIN QUESTIONED WHY
HIS COUNTRY IS BEING BLAMED FOR
UKRAINE'S UNREST BUT ADDED THAT
HE WOULD RESPECT THE OUTCOME OF
THE NEIGHBORING NATION'S VOTE.
CHIEF FOREIGN AFFAIRS MARGARET
WARNER IS IN KIEV AND FILED THIS
REPORT.
>> Warner: IN THE EASTERN CITY
OF SLAVIANSK, MORNING DAWNED
WITH THE SOUND OF ARTILLERY FIRE
ECHOING IN THE HILLS.
>> ( translated ): HOW IT IS
POSSIBLE NOT TO BE AFRAID?
IT IS SCARY, DURING WORLD WAR II
>> Warner: ELSEWHERE, PRO-
RUSSIAN SEPARATISTS AMBUSHED A
PRO-GOVERNMENT MILITIA CONVOY,
ABOUT FIVE HOURS EAST OF KIEV,
KILLING AT LEAST TWO PEOPLE.
TODAY'S NEW VIOLENCE CAME ON THE
HEELS OF YESTERDAY'S REBEL
ATTACK ON A UKRAINIAN ARMY
CHECKPOINT IN VOLNOVAKHA WHICH
KILLED 16 TROOPS, AND ANOTHER
CLASH IN RUBIZHNE LEFT 20 REBELS
DEAD.
TODAY, SPEAKING IN ST.
PETERSBURG, RUSSIAN PRESIDENT
VLADIMIR PUTIN LABELED THE
SITUATION IN UKRAINE A CIVIL
WAR.
>> ( translated ): WHY DID IT
ORIGINATE?
IT ORIGINATED BECAUSE PRESIDENT
YANUKOVICH POSTPONED THE SIGNING
OF THE ASSOCIATION AGREEMENT
WITH THE EUROPEAN UNION.
WHAT FOLLOWED?
A STATE COUP SUPPORTED BY OUR
AMERICAN AND EUROPEAN PARTNERS.
WHAT MORE?
CHAOS, AND NOW WE SEE A FULL-
SCALE CIVIL WAR.
>> Warner: MEANWHILE, RUSSIAN
TROOPS CONTINUED
DRILLS NEAR THE UKRAINIAN
BORDER.
THE RUSSIAN DEFENSE MINISTRY
SAID THEY WILL ALL BE PULLED
BACK WITHIN A FEW DAYS.
ANDRIY PARUBIY HAS BEEN LEADING
THE UKRAINIAN GOVERNMENT
RESPONSE.
THE LONGTIME ACTIVIST ROSE TO
PROMINENCE DURING THE WINTER
UPRISING IN KIEV'S INDEPENDENCE
SQUARE.
HE EMERGED AS COMMANDER OF THE
SELF DEFENSE FORCES FOR THE
PROTEST CAMPS.
NOW, HE'S SECRETARY OF THE
NATIONAL SECURITY AND DEFENSE
COUNCIL, OVERSEEING OPERATIONS
AGAINST THE SEPARATISTS.
I SPOKE WITH HIM EARLIER TODAY.
SECRETARY, THANK YOU FOR HAVING
US.
PRESIDENT PUTIN SAID TODAY
SPEAKING TO GLOBAL CORPORATE
LEADERS THAT UKRAINE WAS IN THE
MIDST OF A FULL-BLOWN CIVIL WAR.
WHAT DO YOU SAY TO THAT?
>> ALL ANNOUNCEMENTS BY PUTIN
ABOUT UKRAINE WERE AND REMAIN
COMPLETE LIES.
I'VE RITIME HE'S ANNOUNCED
RUSSIAN TROOPS WERE RETREATING,
IN FACT, MORE ACTIVE OPERATIONS
WERE BEGUN BY THE TERRORISTS.
I WOULD LIKE TO SAY THAT THE KEY
TO THE PROBLEM IN UKRAINE IS NOT
IN UKRAINE BUT HIDDEN IN THE
KREMLIN AND WITH PUTIN.
THERE IS EVIDENCE AT THE SPECIAL
FORCES OF RUSSIA ARE ACTING ON
THE TERRITORY OVERUKRAINE AND
RUSSIAN MONEY IS ACTING HERE AND
THE FULL COORDINATION OF THE
TERRORISTS IS COMING FROM THE
KREMLIN AND PUTIN.
WHEN WE TALK ABOUT FIGHTING THE
TERRORISTS, WE HAVE TO
UNDERSTAND THE MOST IMPORTANT
THING IS NOT JUST TO LOCALIZE
CERTAIN TERRORISTS, THE MOST
IMPORTANT IS TO LOCALIZE THE
CENTER WHERE THE COORDINATION
AND FINANCE COMES FROM.
THAT'S WHY I WANT TO SAY OUR
CRISIS IS IN THE KREMLIN.
WE HAVE TO UNDERSTAND THE CRISIS
OF UKRAINE IS A GLOBAL CRISIS
AND THE WHOLE WORLD HAS TO UNIT
IN AN ANTI-PUTIN COALITION TO
STOP HIM BECAUSE IF WE DON'T
STOP HIM TODAY, IT'S UNKNOWN
WHERE HIS AGGRESSIVE PLANS WILL
BE DIRECTED TOMORROW.
>> Reporter: YESTERDAY THREE
DAYS BEFORE THE ELECTION YOU HAD
16 UKRAINIAN SOLDIERS KILLED IN
EASTERN UKRAINE.
TODAY ONE OF YOUR BATTALIONS GOT
CAUGHT IN A TERRIBLE
FIREFIGHTING, LOTS OF WOUNDED.
ARE YOU LOSING CONTROL IN THE
EAST?
>> NO, IN THIS SITUATION, IT IS
THE OPPOSITE, WE ARE CLOSING A
RING OF CONTAINMENT AROUND THESE
GROUPS OF TERRORISTS WHO ACTED
TODAY IN SOME REGIONS.
YESTERDAY, THEY TRIED TO BREAK
THROUGH THE RINK BUT HAD TO
RETREAT.
NOW BEFORE THE ELECTIONS, THEY
ARE TRYING TO INTENSIFY THEIR
ACTIONS BUT IN FACT PUTIN'S
OVERALL PLAN REGARDING UKRAINE
IS FAILING.
>> Reporter: NOW, WE WERE JUST
IN THAT REGION, IN DONETSK AND,
JUST YESTERDAY, WE FILMED THE
TAKEOVER BY ARMED MEN OF ONE OF
THESE ELECTION COMMISSION
OFFICERS.
THANKFU-- HALF OF THEM IN THE WE
REGION HAVE BEEN SOMEHOW
DISRUPTED.
DO YOU THINK YOU'RE WINNING
THIS?
>> WE UNDERSTAND THAT THERE ARE
REGIONS WHERE THE SITUATION
TODAY IS NOT STABILIZED.
IN DONETSK AND IN LUGANSK AND
SLAVIANSK, WE UNDERSTAND
ELECTIONS ARE UNDER RISK
NEVERTHELESS, WE GUARANTEE FAIR
AND FREE ELECTIONS IN ALL THE
OTHER REASONS EVEN IN DONETSK
AND LUGANSK.
>> Reporter: YOU HAVE PRO
RUSSIAN SEPARATISTS WHO HAVE
TAKEN OVER GOVERNMENT BUILDINGS
IN THOSE TOWNS.
WHY CAN'T YOU TAKE THEM BACK?
>> BECAUSE THE TACTIC USED WAS
DECLARED BY PUTIN ON TV SOME
TIME AGO AND IN UKRAINE THAT IS
USING CIVILIANS, WOMEN AND
CHILDREN DURING THE OPERATIONS
OF INSURGENCE.
WHEN THEY SEIZE BUILDINGS,
CIVILIANS ARE AMONG THEM,
RECOMMEND AND CHILDREN, MAKING
THE WORK MORE COMPLICATED OF THE
SPECIAL FORCES AND THE ARMY.
>> Reporter: SO YOU'RE
PREVENTED FROM ACTING BECAUSE
CIVILIANS WILL BE KILLED?
>> THE RESTRAINT ON OUR
ANTI-TERRORIST UNITS ARE NOT
LETTING CITIZENS DIE.
ALL PEOPLE ARE CITIZENS OF
UKRAINE AND FOURS THE DEATH OF
ANY PEOPLE WHO JUST HAPPENED TO
BE ON THE TERRORIST OF THE
MILITARY OPERATIONs
UNACCEPTABLE.
SO IN LOCALIZING HOT SPOTS, WE
THINK PEOPLE WHO COME IN WITH
WEAPONS ARE PUNISHED UNDER
YIEWRNLGIAN LAWS BUT AVOID
CIVILIANS AS MUCH AS POSSIBLE.
>> Reporter: CIVILIANS IN THE
EAST SAY WHEN YOU HAVE COME IN
AND PEOPLE HAVE BEEN CAUGHT IN
THE CROSSFIRE, IT'S INFLAMED
ANTI-KIEV FEELING IN THE EAST.
IS THAT A SERIOUS PROBLEM?
ARE YOU AWARE OF THAT?
>> WE UNDERSTAND THAT SOMETIMES
OUR ACTIONS CAN CAUSE RESISTANCE
AMONG CERTAIN PARTS OF THE
POPULATION, BUT THERE ARE A LOT
OF PEOPLE IN LUGANSK AND DONETSK
REGIONS WHO GREET THE
UKRAINIAN'S ARMY ARRIVAL AND
CONSIDER IT THEIR PROTECTION
FROM TERRORISTS WHO COULD APPEAR
ANY DAY IN THEIR CITY.
>> Reporter: FINALLY, LET'S
PITCH FORWARD TO AFTER THE
ELECTION.
MILITARY AND POLITICAL
COMMANDERS OF THE DONETSK
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC, THE
SEPARATISTS TOLD US THEY DON'T
CARE WHAT HAPPENS IN TOMORROW'S
ELECTION, THEY'RE NOT GOING
ANYWHERE.
THE DONETSK GOVERNMENT SAID IT'S
TIME TO MOVE OUT, THE PEOPLE ARE
READY TO GIVE UP THE WEAPONS.
ARE YOU GOING TO CLEAR THEM AM?
>> I'M SURE THAT THE UKRAINIAN
GOVERNMENT AFTER THE
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS WILL
CONTINUE ACTIONS TO PROTECT OUR
CITIZENS BECAUSE ANY RESEARCH
SHOWS THAT THE "LEADERS" OF THE
DONETSK REPUBLIC, SO-CALLED, DO
NOT HAVE THE SUPPORT OF SOCIETY.
MORE PEOPLE ARE SUPPORTERS OF A
UNITED UKRAINIAN STATE.
OF COURSE THERE WERE PROBLEMS IN
UKRAINE AND EXACERBATED B BY
YANUKOVYCH WHO TRIED TO SPLIT
UKRAINE.
AFTER THE ELECTION OF A NEW
PRESIDENT, I'M CERTAIN PSYCH
PSYCHOLOGICAL CHANGES WILL TAKE
PLACE.
THE MAIN PURPOSE OF PUTIN TO NOT
LET THE ELECTIONS HAPPEN WILL
FAIL AND I AM SURE AFTER THE
ELECTION FASTER AND MORE
EFFECTIVELY WE CAN ELIMINATE THE
PROBLEMS THAT EXIST IN PARTS OF
OUR COUNTRY TODAY.
>> Reporter: THANK YOU,
MR. SECRETARY.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: JEFFREY BROWN
SPOKE TO MARGARET A SHORT TIME
AGO.
>> Brown: HOW DO OFFICIALS
EXPLAIN WHAT'S GOING ON WITH
VLADIMIR PUTIN AND SEEMINGLY
CONTRADICTORY STATEMENTS?
>> Reporter: THEY BELIEVE HE'S
PLAYING A DOUBLE GAME.
HE WANTS TO KEEP UKRAINE
DESTABILIZED AND TORN BETWEEN
EAST AND WEST.
ON THE OTHER HAND, HE DOESN'T
WANT TO BE BLAMED ENTIRELY FOR
MESSING UP THE ELECTION BECAUSE
THE U.S. AND EUROPEANS HAVE MADE
IT REALLY CLEAR TO HIM THERE
WILL BE TOUGHER ECONOMIC
SANCTIONS AND YOU NOTICE HIS
REMARKS TODAY CAME IN AN
ECONOMIC FORM OF GLOBAL C.E.O.
IN ST. PETERSBURG.
SO THE INTIMIDATION CAMPAIGN
CONTINUES.
HE WOULD LIKE TO MAKE IT LOOK
LIKE THE RESULTS ARE OF DUBIOUS
LEGITIMACY, BUT I'M TOLD PEOPLE
CLOSE TO HIM ARE PRIVATELY
TALKING TO THE MAN CONSIDERED TO
BE THE LIKELY WINNER IF NOT
OUTRIGHT ON SUNDAY THEN IN A
RUNOFF AND THAT IS THE SO-CALLED
CHOCOLATE KING,
MULTI-BILLIONAIRE PETRO
CHERCHGO.
>> Brown: WHAT WOULD BE THE
IMPACT ON THE DONETSK PEOPLE'S
REPUBLIC?
>> Reporter: WHEN WE TOLD THEM
PUTIN WAS GOING TO MOVE TROOPS
OFF THE BORDER, THEY LOOK
DISMAYED.
THIS DOES NOT COMPARE TO CRIMEA
WHERE I WAS, AND WHEN YOU SAW
THE RUSSIANS TRAINED AND ADVISED
LOCALS REALLY TAKING CONTROL
DOWN THERE, IT DOESN'T FEEL THAT
WAY HERE.
THERE ARE A LOT OF INTERNAL
SPATS, THEY'RE HAVING TROUBLE
EITHER GOVERNING THE AREAS THAT
THEY HOLD.
SO THE BELIEF AMONG UKRAINIAN
OFFICIALS HERE IS WITHOUT
RUSSIA'S BACKING THAT IT WILL BE
EASIER TO CLEAR THEM OUT.
NOW, THEY MAY BE WRONG BUT THAT
IS THE BELIEF.
>> Brown: I KNOW THAT YOU ARE
BACK IN KIEV.
WHAT'S THE ATMOSPHERE LIKE AHEAD
OF SUNDAY'S ELECTION?
>> Reporter: KIND OF ODD,
JEFF.
THERE'S NO PRE-ELECTION FRENZY.
YOU SEE BILLBOARDS AND SO ON,
BUT TODAY SCHENKO REFUSED TO
DEBATE BUT MET WITH DANISH
OFFICIALS.
YOU GET THE IDEA EVERYONE IS
LOOKING AHEAD.
ONE OF THEPE WE TALKED TO
SAID WE HAVE TO GET A GOVERNMENT
EVERYONE RECOGNIZES SO WE CAN
MOVE FORWARD.
SO THE STAKES ARE HIGH BUT THIS
DOES NOT FEEL LIKE AN AMERICAN
STYLE LAST MINUTE, LAST EVENING
RALLY SUCH AS WE WOULD HAVE IN
THE STATES.
>> Brown: MARGARET WARNER IN
UKRAINE.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> Reporter: THANK YOU, JEFF.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT, A PAIR OF
HEALTHCARE STORIES THAT FOCUS ON
DISTURBING GAPS IN THE U.S.
SYSTEM.
FIRST, A MAJOR PROBLEM WITH
MENTAL HEALTH CARE THAT'S
DRAWING LITTLE ATTENTION DAY TO
DAY, YET IS HAVING A PROFOUND
IMPACT ON COSTS, TREATMENT AND
THE WAY AMERICANS LIVE.
JUDY WOODRUFF RECORDED THIS
CONVERSATION EARLIER THIS WEEK.
>> Woodruff: FROM 1995 TO
2012, THE NUMBER OF AMERICANS
DIAGNOSED WITH A SI SEVERE
MENTAL ILLNESS ROAD BY 8% FROM
7.2 UP TO 9.6 MILLION.
AT THE SAME TIME THE NUMBER OF
PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITAL BEDS
AVAILABLE DECREASED BY 32%.
THIS HAS LEFT HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS OF THE MENTALLY ILL ON
THE STREETS, IN EMERGENCY ROOMS
OR BEHIND BARS.
MENTAL ILLNESS ACCOUNTS FOR 6%
OF TOTAL HEALTHCARE COSTS AND,
YET, THE THE COST OF TREATMENT,
DISABILITY BENEFITS AND LOST
PRODUCTIVITY ADD UP TO A LOSS OF
ALMOST $450 BILLION FOR THE U.S.
ECONOMY.
THESE NUMBERS FRAME A YEAR-LONG
INVESTIGATION BY U.S.A. TODAY
INTO THE TOLL THIS CRISIS IS
TAKING ON FAMILIES, THE ECONOMY
AND THE HEALTHCARE SYSTEM.
THEY'RE CALLING IT THE COST OF
NOT CARING.
LIZ SZABO IS A HEALTH REPORTER
FOR "USA TODAY" AND IS THE MAIN
AUTHOR OF THE SERIES.
LIZ SZABO, WELCOME TO THE
PROGRAM.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: THE SHEER
MAGNITUDE OF THIS PROBLEM IS
STAGGERING, ISN'T IT?
>> YEAH, IT'S REALLY SOMETHING
THAT TOUCHES EVERYONE, AND WE
WANTED TO CALL THE SERIES "THE
COST OF NOT CARING" TO SHOW HOW
WE ALL PAY THE COST BOTH IN
DOLLARS AND IN HUMAN SUFFERING.
>> Woodruff: WHAT DREW YOUR
ATTENTION TO IT IN PARTICULAR?
YOU COVER HEALTH REGULARLY, BUT
WHAT ABOUT MENTAL HEALTH IN
PARTICULAR?
>>TH GREW OUT OF
SOME OF THE MASS TRAGEDIES WE'VE
SUFFERED IN THE PAST FEW YEARS,
BUT WE ALSO WANTED TO GO BEYOND
THOSE SHOOTINGS.
I LEARNED A LOT ABOUT THE
HEALTHCARE SYSTEM AND WHAT'S
GOING WRONG, THAT WE REALLY
WANTED TO LOOK AT THE TRAGEDIES
THAT HAPPEN EVERY DAY, PRIVATELY
IN PEOPLE'S HOMES AND THE LOSSES
THAT PEOPLE ARE SUFFERING FROM
MENTAL ILLNESS THAT DON'T MAKE
HEADLINES.
>> Woodruff: HOW DID YOU FIND
OUT HOW WIDESPREAD THIS IS?
>> WE MADE A LOT OF PHONE CALLS
AND HEARD FROM MANY FAMILIES WHO
ARE TRYING TO GET HELP AND JUST
NOT MANAGING.
>> Woodruff: AS YOU WERE
SAYING, YOU TALKED TO T OF
PEOPLE IN THE COUNTRY.
I WANT TO SHOW OUR VIEWERS A
SHORT EXCERPT OF ONE OF THE
PEOPLE YOU SPENT TIME WITH.
HER NAME IS KAREN KELLY.
SHE LIVES IN VERMONT.
HERE'S PART OF WHAT SHE HAS TO
SAY.
>> THE NEAR I TURNED 40, I WAS
REALLY SAD.
I COULDN'T GET HAPPY OR EXCITED
ABOUT ANYTHING.
MY HUSBAND GAVE ME A WONDERFUL
WEEKEND IN MONTREAL AND I HAD AN
ABSOLUTELY MISERABLE TIME.
I CAME BACK AND TOLD HIM THAT I
THOUGHT THAT I WAS DEPRESSED.
I WENT THROUGH SCREENING, THE
PSYCHOLOGIST SAID, YOU
ABSOLUTELY HAVE DEPRESSION.
MOST OF THE TIMETH NOTHING YOU
CAN -- IT'S NOTHING YOU CAN
EXPLAIN.
FOR A LOT OF PEOPLE, THEY CAN
LOOK REALLY GOOD ON THE OUTSIDE
AND ON THE INSIDE BE A TOTAL
MESS, YET THEY HAVE TO STILL
LIVE WITH IT, AND IT'S A
STRUGGLE.
>> Woodruff: WHAT HAPPENED TO
HER?
SHE GOT INTO A PRETTY DIRE SET
OF CIRCUMSTANCES, DIDN'T SHE?
>> SHE'S A WIFE WITH AND MOM
LIKE MANY OF YOUR VIEWERS.
SHE REEK REC NICED SHE NEEDED
HELP.
SHE WAS THINKING ABOUT DEATH AND
HER PSYCHIATRIST COULDN'T FIND
HER A HOSPITAL BED.
SHE COULDN'T GET HELP.
SHE KNEW SHE WOULD HAVE TO BE ON
THE VERGE OF DEATH TO GET HELP
SO SHE SWALLOWED AN ENTIRE
BOTTLE OF PILLS.
WENT TO AN EMERGENCY ROOM.
THE CLOSEST BED THEY COULD FIND
THREE DAYS LATER WAS IN THE NEXT
STATE.
SHE HAD TO GO 200 MILES.
>> Woodruff: TO BE TREATED.
THAT'S RIGHT.
THE AMBULANCE TOOK HER TO
MASSACHUSETTS AT A COST OF
$3,600, PAID FOR LARGELY BY
MEDICARE.
>> Woodruff: HOW TYPICAL IS
HER SITUATION?
>> IT'S PRETTY TYPICAL.
WE HEAR HORROR STORIES FROM
EVERY EMERGENCY ROOM IN THE
COUNTRY WE TALK TO.
THERE IS SOMETHING GOING OVEN
CALLED BOARDING.
WHEN SOMEBODY COMES TO AN
EMERGENCY ROOM AND CAN'T GET A
PSYCHIATRIC BED, THEY JUST LIVE
IN THE E.R.
WE'VE TALKED TO SOMEONE WHO SAID
HE HAD PSYCHOTIC PATIENTS
WAITING IN THE E.R. FOR TWO
WEEKS FOR A BED.
>> Woodruff: WHY DO YOU
BELIEVE IT'S GOTTEN TO THIS
EPIDEMIC STATE THAT SNTS.
>> THERE ARE A LOT OF
COMPLICATED REASONS, BUT THE
RECESSION REALLY HIT THE MENTAL
HEALTH FIELD HARD.
STATES CUT NEARLY $5 BILLION
FROM MENTAL HEALTH CARE SERVICES
JUST FROM 2009 TO 2012.
SO THEY CUT 10% OF ALL THE
HEALTHCARE PSYCHIATRIC BEDS IN
THE COUNTRY.
SO IT'S REALLY GOTTEN TO BE A
CRISIS.
>> Woodruff: BEFORE THAT, WAS
THE COUNTRY DOING PRETTY WELL BY
PEOPLE WHO ARE MENTALLY ILL?
>> I DON'T THINK THERE IS EVER
BEEN A SENSE THAT THE MENTAL
HEALTH SYSTEM HAS DONE
PARTICULARLY WELL.
THERE WAS A MOVE IN THE '60s
TO GET PEOPLE OUT OF HOSPITAL
BEDS AND INSTITUTIONS INTO THE
COMMUNITY.
UNFORTUNATELY, THE COMMUNITY
RESOURCES NEVER MATERIALIZED.
PEOPLE REALLY WERE LEFT WITH
NOWHERE TO GO.
>> Woodruff: I REMEMBER YOU
AND I WERE TALK JUST BEFORE THE
YEAR HERE.
I COVERED THE JIMMY CARTER
PRESIDENCY.
ROSELINE CARTER, THE FIRST
LAIDY, MADE THIS HER FOCUS, THE
ATTENTION TO THE MENTALLY ILL.
IT TAKES A CONSTANT EFFORT.
>> IT GETS PUSHED TO THE BACK
BURNER.
PEOPLE SAY WHEN THERE ARE BUDGET
CUTS, MENTAL HEALTH IS THE FIRST
TO BE CUT.
MAYBE IT'S BECAUSE PEOPLE WHO
ARE PROFOUNDLY DISABLED CAN'T
ALWAYS ADVOCATE FOR THEMSELVES
AND I THINK THERE SS
FALSE IDEA THAT WE DON'T HAVE TO
PAY FOR MENTAL HEALTH, THAT WE
CAN GET BY ON SKIMPING.
WE FIND WHEN MENTAL HEALTH CARE
GETS CUT, STATES DO PAY.
THEY PAY FOR THE EMERGENCY ROOM,
THEY PAY TO BUILD HOMELESS
SHELTERS AND PRISONS.
I THINK SOMETHING LIKE 16% OF
PEOPLE IN PRISON AND JAILS ARE
ACUTELY PSYCHOTIC.
>> Reporter: SO IF THESE FOLKS
ARE NOT ABLE TO GET SOME KIND OF
TREATMENT EARLY ON, THEN THEY
END UP IN A MUCH WORSE PLACE?
>> OFTEN, YEAH.
I THINK WE TALL IDEA UP 5 --
TALLIED UP 590,000.
HALF A MILLION AMERICANS ARE IN
THESE NEW INSTITUTIONS, IN
PRISONS, HOMELESS SHELTERS OR
THE MORGUE.
BEFORE 38,000 SUICIDES A YEAR,
MORE THAN FROM HOMICIDE,
PROSTATE CANCER OR CAR
ACCIDENTS.
>> Reporter: YOU MENTIONED
"USA TODAY" IS MAKING THIS A
YEAR-LONG SERIES.
YOU'RE FOCUSING ON THE COST.
THERE'S ALSO THE STIGMA
ASSOCIATED WITH BEING MENTALLY
ILL OR HAVING AN EMOTIONAL
ILLNESS.
>> WE'RE LOOKING INTO THE ISSUE
OF STIGMA BECAUSE STIGMA CAN
PREVENT PEOPLE FROM GETTING HELP
IF THEY'RE AFRAID OF BEING
LINED.
IT ALSO KEEPS FROM SUPPORTING
YOUR NEIGHBORS.
IF YOU HAVE A CHILD WITH CANCER,
YOUR NEIGHBORS OFFER SUPPORT.
IF YOU HAVE A CHILD WITH
SCHIZOPHRENIA, THE NEIGHBORS
TURN AWAY.
WE CAN'T PUT $5 BILLION BACK
INTO STATE COFFERS BY OURSELVES,
BUT WE'RE HOPING TO INSPIRE A
LITTLE COMPASSION AND
UNDERSTANDING FOR THE FAMILIES
AND PEOPLE WHO ARE SUFFERING.
>> Woodruff: LIZ SZABO,
REPORTER WITH "USA TODAY."
THE SERIES THEY'RE DOING IS THE
COST OF NOT CARING ABOUT THE
MENTALLY ILL.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: OUR SECOND
HEALTH CARE STORY IS ABOUT
BREAST CANCER, A CANCER THAT
ATTRACTS MORE ATTENTION AND,
FREQUENTLY, PUBLIC SUPPORT THAN
MENTAL ILLNESS.
BUT EVEN SO, THERE ARE WIDE
RACIAL DISPARITIES THAT ARE LESS
DISCUSSED, PARTICULARLY THE GAP
BETWEEN AFRICAN AMERICAN WOMEN
AND WHITE WOMEN.
GWEN IFILL HAS THE STORY OF
EFFORTS IN TENNESSEE TO TACKLE
THAT PROBLEM.
>> Ifill: IN MEMPHIS WHERE
TIES TO RELIGION RUN STRONG,
HEALTH OFFICIALS HAVE TURNED TO
A HIGHER AUTHORITY FOR HELP.
>> BECAUSE I BELIEVE THAT GOD IS
ON MY SIDE.
I'M ON A MISSION WITH THE
GOSPEL.
>> Ifill: HERE AT MISSIONARY
BAPTIST CHURCH ON THE CITY'S
SOUTH SIDE, PASTOR JAMES
KENDRICK HAS HELD SUNDAY WORSHIP
SERVICE WITH THE SAME FAMILIES
FOR A GENERATION.
>> I KNOW HOW TO PRAY.
>> Ifill: KENDRICK INVITED
HEALTH SPECIALIST CAROL DICKENS
TO TALK ABOUT ALARMING NEW
FINDINGS THAT AFRICAN-AMERICAN
WOMEN IN MEMPHIS DIE FROM BREAST
CANCER AT A RATE TWICE THAT OF
WHITE WOMEN.
>> YOU AT RISK AND THIS IS
INFORMATION THAT YOU CAN SAVE A
LIFE.
>> Ifill: ACCORDING TO
RESEARCH IN THE JOURNAL OF
CANCER EPIDEMIOLOGY, THE RATE OF
BREAST CANCER DEATHS FOR BLACK
WOMEN NATIONALLY IS 40% GREA
THAN THAT OF WHITE WOMEN, AND
THE CITY WITH THE WORST RACIAL
DISPARITY IS MEMPHIS.
>> IS EVERYBODY GETTING SOME
KNOWLEDGE HERE THIS MORNING?
>> Ifill: IT WAS PART OF A
PUBLIC AWARENESS CAMPAIGN
SPONSORED BY
HEALTHCARE, THE CITY'S LARGEST
PROVIDER.
THE HOPE IS TO CONNECT WITH
AFRICAN-AMERICAN WOMEN WHO OFTEN
REACH ADVANCED STAGES OF BREAST
CANCER BEFORE THE DISEASE IS
DETECTED.
>> I WANT AS MANY WOMEN AS
POSSIBLE, PARTICULARLY IN THESE
KINDS OF COMMUNITIES, TO HAVE A
SCREENING MAMMOGRAM.
EARLY DETECTION.
>> Ifill: OAK GROVE MISSIONARY
BAPTIST IS ONE OF 500 IN THE
COUNTRY THAT CAME TOGETHER TO
TACKLE BREAST CANCER.
>> ONE THING I LEARNED TO
APPRECIATE IS THE POWER OF
FAITH.
FAITH PLAYS A BIG ROLE IN THE
CULTURE, THE DYNAMICS IN THE
COMMUNITIES, AND IT'S A
CONVENER.
FAITH CONVENES PEOPLE, AND IT'S
A PLACE WHERE YOU CAN TALK AND
HAVE SAFE CONVERSATION.
>> Ifill: ONCOLOGIST DR. TOWER
SAYS THE PROBLEM IS THIS:  WHILE
OVERALL DEATH RATES FOR BREAST
CANCER HAVE IMPROVED NATIONALLY,
GAINS FOR BLACK WOMEN HAVE
LAGGED.
>> IN THE EARLY '60s, WHITE
WOMEN AND BLACK WOMEN REALLY HAD
THE SAME SURVIVAL RATE.
AS WE'VE IMPROVED THE TREATMENT
OF BREAST CANCER, WHITE WOMEN
HAVE DONE BETTER AND
AFRICAN-AMERICAN WOMEN HAVE NOT.
>> Ifill: WHILE A SMALL
PERCENTAGE OF AFRICAN-AMERICAN
WOMEN HAV HAVE A MORE AGGRESSIVE
BREAST CANCER CALLED TRIPLE
NEGATIVE, HE THINKS THE MAIN
PROBLEM IS CULTURAL.
>> WE THINK IT'S CULTURAL AND
SOCIOECONOMIC AND TRUE IN
MEMPHIS WHERE SOCIOECONOMIC
STRATA AND RACE SEEM TO MIRROR
EACH OTHER.
>> Ifill: MEM THE
NATION'S FOURTH BIGGEST CITY AND
FOR THE LAST THREE YEARS THE
GULF BETWEEN THE RACES HAS
WIDENED.
AFRICAN-AMERICANS SUFFER A
POVERTY RATE HERE OF 33.6% WHILE
POVERTY FOR WHITES DECLINED TO
8%.
>> HEY, KID.
HOW YOU DOING?
>> HANGING IN.
OW YOU BEEN FEELING?
>> Ifill: MARY SINGLETON, A
PATIENT OF INTEREST TOWERS, SAID
CONCERNS FROM MONEY DELAYED HER
FROM SEEKING HELP.
>> I DISCOVERE LUNCH AND KEPT
THINKING BECAUSE I DON'T HAVE
HEALTH INSURANCE, I HAVE TO
FIGURE OUT HOW TO PAY.
>> WE DIDN'T SEE LYMPH NODES ON
THE SCAN.
>> Ifill: UNINSURED SINGLE
MOTHER, SHE IGNORED THE LUNCH
TILL SHE FELT PAIN.
BY THE TAME SHE MADE IT TO THE
CLINIC, SHE HAD STAGE 4 BREAST
WORK LONG HOURS AND HARD,
YOU DON'T REALLY THINK ABOUT
YOUR OWN HEALTH.
YOU'RE ALMOST EMBARRASSED TO
SAY, YOU KNOW, BEFORE THIS, I
HAVE NEVER HAD A MAMMOGRAM
BECAUSE THE COST AND THE
PRIORITY WEREN'T THERE.
IT WAS ALWAYS SOMETHING ELSE
THAT YOU'VE GOT TO DO THAT
YOU'VE GOT TO TAKE CARE OF AND,
EVEN THOUGH MY CHILDREN ARE
GROWN, YOU KNOW, YOU STILL --
YOU'RE STILL IN THAT MODE.
>> HEALTHCARE IN IMPOVERISHED
AREAS ON THE LIST OF PRIORITIES
IS PROBABLY NUMBER 11 OR 12, IN
1 THROUGH 13.
BECAUSE WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
WHERE WE'RE GOING TO LIVE AND
EAT.
>> Ifill: HEALTH OFFICIALS SAY
HEALTH NAVIGATORS LIKE CAROL
DICKENS COULD BE KEY TO CLOSING
THE RACIAL GAP.
DICKENS WHOSE POSITION IS FUNDED
BY THE SUSAN G. KOMEN FOUNDATION
WORK HARD TO HELP PEOPLE WHO GET
LOST IN THE HEALTHCARE SYSTEM.
>> I'M TRYING TO GET A PERSON
FROM A TO B TO C TO D.
I'M NOT GOING TO LEAVE YOU TILL
WE KNOW WHAT HAS TO BE DONE FOR
YOU.
SO YOU NEED TO GO IN EARLY AND I
NEED TO STAY WITH YOU.
>> WE NEED TO REPLICATE FIVE,
TEN, TWENTY TIMES.
WE NEED MORE NAVIGATORS IN THE
COMMUNITY, IF ONLY TO PROVIDE
ANOTHER HAND TO HOLD, A TRUSTED
ADVISOR THROUGH THE PROCESS TO
BUILD UP THAT CONFIDENCE IN THE
NT'S MIND THAT THIS IS
SOMETHING THEY CAN DO.
>> DOCTORS SAY IT'S STILL
UNCLEAR WHAT IMPACT THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT WILL HAVE ON
IMPROVING CANCER SURVIVAL RATES
FOR BLACK WOMEN.
IN THE MEANTIME, METHODIST
HEALTHCARE AND THE WEST CLINIC
SAY THEY ARE COMMITTED TO
FINDING WAYS TO COVER ALL COSTS.
>> THERE'S NO MEDICAL JARGON, NO
BIOPSY REQUIRED.
WE BRING THEM IN AND GET THEM
SCREENED.
IF THEY HAVE AN ABNORMAL
SCREENING, WE GET THEM BIOPSIED.
IF THEY HAVE A POSITIVE BOPSY,
WE GET THEM OPERATED ON AND GET
THEM CHEMOTHERAPY OR HORMONAL
THERAPY OR WHAT THEY WANT, ALL
AT NO COST TO THEM.
>> Ifill: DR. TOWER'S EVENTUAL
GOAL THAT IMPROVED BREAST CANCER
SURVIVAL RATE SERVED AS A MODEL
FOR OTHER DISPARITIES.
>> WE PICKED BREAST CANCER FIRST
AND TRYING TO MAKE A MODEL OF
DEALING WITH BREAST CANCER TO
SHOW US HOW TO DEAL WITH
PROSTATE CANCER, LUNG CANCER
SCREENING, DIABETES, STROKE,
BLOOD PRESSURE.
>> I KNOW I'M ALL RIGHT!
>> Ifill: CHURCH LEADERS AT
OAK GROVE BAPTIST MISSIONARY
HOPE IN THIS CASE FAITH WILL
TRIUMPH OVER FEAR AND THE
DISEASE.
>> Sreenivasan: AND TO THE
ANALYSIS OF SHIELDS AND GERSON.
THAT'S SYNDICATED COLUMNIST MARK
SHIELDS AND WASHINGTON POST
COLUMNIST MICHAEL GERSON.
DAVID BROOKS IS AWAY TODAY.
>> Sreenivasan: LET'S TALK
ELECTIONS.
KENTUCKY, GEORGIA HAD ELECTIONS.
SO YOU CAN BIGGEST TAKEAWAY.
>> WE WHO COVER POLITICS ARE
FRUSTRATED SPORTS WRITERS.
WE LOVE THE EASE QUESTIONS IN
SOFTBALL OR THE UNFAIR CHARTS, A
CHEAP SHOT, AND TO USE TENNIS
JARGON THAT I NEVER PLAYED, IS
SAYING REPUBLICANS THIS YEAR
HAVE COMMITTED NO UNFORCED
ERRORS.
THEY HAVE NOT -- THEY'VE PUT
THEMSELVES IN A POSITION TO
COMPETE, IF NOT TO WIN IN THE
COMPETITIVE SENATE RACES.
THEY HAVEN'T NOMINATED PEOPLE
THAT THEY'RE GOING TO HAVE TO
RUN AWAY FROM WHO ARE SEEN AS
LOSERS, THAT IS AN
ACCOMPLISHMENT TO THEM.
>> I AGREE WITH THAT.
I THINK THE REPUBLICAN
ESTABLISHMENT IS NOT A MYTH OR
PAPER TIGER.
THITCH MCCONNELL IS
EVIDENCE OF THAT.
THERE'S SOMETHING IMPRESSIVE
ABOUT HIS UTTERLY BLAND
RUTHLESSNESS WHEN IT COMES TO
THESE RACES AND I THINK IT'S
TRUE, I THINK REPUBLICANS HAVE
DETERMINED THEY WANT THE SENATE,
THEY'RE NOT GOING TO MAKE STUPID
MISTAKES AND THAT, GIVEN RECENT
ELECTIONS, IS A HUGE
ACCOMPLISHMENT FOR THEM.
SO I THINK THEY FOUND, IN THE
SHUTDOWN, THAT TEA PARTY GROUPS,
THE LEADERS OF THE TEA PARTY
GROUPS ARE NOT APPEASABLE.
THEY'RE NOT GOING TO BE BROUGHT
INTO THE COALITION, THEY HAVE TO
BE FOUGHT.
AND WE'VE SEEN A POWER REACTION
IN THE CHAMBER AND OTHERS TO
THESE GROUPS AND THEY HAVE BEEN
LARGELY DEFEATED.
>> Sreenivasan: SHOULD
DEMOCRATS BE CONCERNED THE
REPUBLICANS ARE TAKING THE
NECESSARY STEPS TO WIN BACK THE
SENATE?
>> SURE.
THEY DON'T HAVE WHAT THEY HAD IN
INDIANA WHERE JOE WON, HARRY
REID IN NEVADA.
THE DEMOCRATS HAVE FIVE SEATS IN
THE PAST TWO ELECTIONS THAT THE
REPUBLICANS JUST GAVE UP
ESSENTIALLY BY NOMINATING
UNELECTABLE CANDIDATES, TEA
PARTY PEOPLE.
WHAT THE TEA PARTY HAD GOING FOR
IT WAS SURPRISE, IN THE PAST.
THAT EL MEANT WAS GONE BECAUSE
THE INCUMBENTS THIS YEAR WERE
ALREADY -- MICHAEL MENTIONED
MITCH MCCONNELL.
IF YOU WANT TO GET AN IDEA OF
WHAT THIS YEAR IS GOING TO BE
ABOUT, I MEAN, THERE WAS NO LIFT
OF IT BETWEEN DRIVING DREAM,
INSPIRING VISION OR POLICY
STATEMENT.
IT WAS JUST HE THANKED HIS
FAMILY, MADE THE OBLIGATORY NOD
TO THE OPPONENT AND IMMEDIATELY
LAUNCHED A DIE TRIBE AGAINST HIS
OPPONENT BROUGHT TO YOU BY
BARACK OBAMA AND HARRY REID.
I THINK THAT WILL THE TENOR OF
THE YEAR.
>> I THINK THE DEMOCRATS HAVE
GOOD CANDIDATES IN KENTUCKY AND
GEORGIA.
BUT THE PROBLEM IS THE
BATTLEGROUND OF ROLL OF THE
SENATE IS IN REPUBLICANS STATES
AND THE REPUBLICANS ONLY NEED A
FEW.
IT'S IN THE SIXTH YEAR OF THE
DEMOCRATIC PRESIDENT THAT IS
DOWN IN THE POLLS.
SO THERE'S A SWIFT CURRENT HERE
THAT I THINK MAKE IT VERY HARD
FOR EVEN VERY GOOD CANDIDATES TO
GET TRACTION IN THIS ELECTION.
>> GEORGIA IS INTERESTING, HARI,
IN THE SENSE THAT THE
REPUBLICANS HAD FIVE CANDIDATES.
THE TRUE BELIEVERS, SIDELINERS,
TEA PARTY FINISHED FOURTH AND
FIFTH AND THE TWO WHO WON COULD
BE CALLED COUNTRY CLUB
REPUBLICANS, SO LET'S MAKE THE
COCKTAILS AT 7:00.
SO THEY'RE IN A RUNOFF AND THAT
WILL BE BRUTAL.
>> I THINK IT'S MORE BECAUSE
REPUBLICANS HAVE OPENED UP
ROUTES LIKE OREGON.
THEY HAVE A STRONG CANDIDATE IN
A TRADITIONALLY BLUE STATE, BUT
THE EASTERN PART OF THE STATE IS
MORE LIKE A MIDWESTERN STATE, IN
MANY WAYS AND I THINK THE
REPUBLICANS ARE EXPANDING THE
FIELDS, NOT JUST DEFENDING.
>> Sreenivasan: DO WE SEE THIS
IN ARKANSAS OR ALASKA WHERE THEY
WILL BE COMPETITIVE?
>> THERE'S NO QUESTION THE
REPUBLICANS ARE EYEING, FIRST OF
ALL, SOUTH DAKOTA WHICH HAD BEEN
HELD BY JIM JOHNSON WHO IS
RETIRING AND THE PRESIDENT LOST
BY 20 VOTES AND STATES MITT
ROMNEY CARRIED BY 14 POINTS,
MONTANA, AND IN ADDITION TO THAT
YOU HAVE WEST VIRGINIA WHERE THE
PRESIDENT LOST BY 27 POINTS.
YOU KNOW, THOSE ARE THE
IMMEDIATE ONES THE REPUBLICANS
HAD THEIR EYES ON.
THEN YOU'VE GOT BATTLE DEMOCRAT
INCUMBENTS.
BUT I WOULD SAY EVERY ONE OF THE
DEMOCRATIC INCUMBENTS IS IN A
POSITION TO WIN.
THERE'S NOBODY THEY'RE WRITING
OFF AT THIS POINT, WHETHER KAY
HAGAN IN NORTH CAROLINA, MARY
ANN DREW IN LOUISIANA AND MARK
IN ALASKA.
THEY'RE PROVEN CANDIDATES AND I
THINK THEY'RE GOING TO BE
COMPETITIVE RACES.
>> Sreenivasan: SO IS THIS
IDEA OF THE TEA PARTY VERSUS THE
ESTABLISHMENT AN AREA THE MEDIA
LIKES OR LET'S SAY THEY'VE
ALREADY HAD AN IMPACT IN MOVING
THE PARTY IN A MORE CONSERVATIVE
DIRECTION?
>> THERE' CLEAR DIFFERENCE.
THE REPUBLICAN PARTY IS MORE
MONLITHICLY CONSERVATIVE THAN IN
THE PAST, NO QUESTIONS.
BUT MOST REPUBLICANS ARE IN A
REAGAN EAT CATEGORY.
THE TEA PARTY LEADERS OF ALL OF
MODERN GOVERNMENT, THEY WOULD
REGARD REAGAN AS A RHINO.
SO I THINK THERE IS A CLEAR
DIFFERENCE IN TONE AND STYLE AND
WHY THERE IS A SERIOUS FIGHT
HERE.
BUT REPUBLICANS FACE A HUGE
CHALLENGE IN THIS.
THEY CAN DEFEAT THE TEA PARTY
AND TRY TO GET THE BASE OUT IN
THE MID-TERM ELECTION, WHICH
SOMETIMES WINS WITH A MESSAGE AS
COMPLEX AS ObamaCare BAD.
BUT THAT WILL NOT WIN THE 2016
ELECTION AND, IN FACT, COULD
LOSE THE SENATE IN 2016, WHICH
IS THE FLIP SIDE OF THE
DEMOGRAPHIC ADVANTAGE
REPUBLICANS HAVE RIGHT NOW.
SO THEY'RE GOING TO HAVE TO MAKE
A SHIFT.
THEY CAN WIN BUT WILL HAVE TO
REBRAND THE PARTY TO WIN IN
2016.
>> Sreenivasan: LOOKING
FORWARD, JUNE 3, MISSISSIPPI, A
RACE THAT GOT MORE INTERESTING.
WE HAVE THAT DI THAD COCHRAN, ME
ESTABLISHMENT, AND CHRIS DANIEL.
I WANT TO HEAR YOUR OPINIONS BUT
I THINK FOUR PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
ARRESTED BECAUSE SUPPORTERS OF
McDANIEL WENT INTO THE NURSING
HOME OF THAD COCHRAN'S WIFE WHO
IS IN DEMENTIA AND POSTED A
VIDEO OF HER.
SEEMS LIKE A NEW LOW.
>> WELL, THE STORY IS STILL
ASSEMBLING AND THE PERSON WHO
DID IT WAS WITH SOMEBODY WHO DID
IT ON HIS OWN AND THE QUESTION
IS HOW DEEPLY THE McDANIEL
CAMPAIGN EITHER WAS AWARE OF IT,
DIDN'T STOP IT OR WAS EVEN
COMPLICIT IN.
I DON'T UNDERSTAND, AND
MRS. COCHRAN, SADLY, IS IN
DEMENTIA, IS IN HOSPICE CARE AND
HAS BEEN THERE 13 YEARS.
WHAT POSSIBLE ADVANTAGE -- JUST
ASK WHAT SORT OF PERVERTED
THINKING LEADS TO LET'S GET A
VIDEO OF THIS DISABLED WOMAN,
INVADE HER PRIVACY AND PUT IT
ON -- AND ANYBODY SHOULD BE
DISQUALIFIED FROM THE VOTE.
IF THE CAMPAIGN IS INVOLVED,
THEY WILL PAY DEALER.
>> THE CAMPAIGN WAS DOING WELL
IN THE LAST FEW WEEKS.
>> COCHRAN IS WEAK IN MANY WAYS
AS A CANDIDATE, THIS IS THE LAST
BEST HOPE OF THE TEA PARTY, BUT
I THINK McDERMOTT WAS IN
HERE.
IT WAS REPORTED TODAY McTANL
AS A RADIO TALK SHOW HOST HAD
OCCASIONALLY CO-HOSTED THE SHOW
WITH ONE OF THE PEOPLE THAT WAS
ARRESTED, ONE OF THE FOUR PEOPLE
THAT WAS ARRESTED.
THIS IS NOT A DISTANT
RELATIONSHIP.
THERE'S NO EVIDENCE THAT THE
CAMPAIGN WAS INVOLVED YET BUT
YOU THINK HAVE AN INVESTIGATION,
A CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION THAT'S
GOING TO BE E-MAILS, YOU'RE
GOING TO REVIEW E-MAILS AND HAVE
SUBPOENAS AND OTHER THINGS.
I CAN'T IMAGINE NOW THAT
MISSISSIPPI REPUBLICANS WOULD
WANT TO SEND A CANDIDATE INTO A
GENERAL ELECTION THAT'S IN THE
MIDDLE OF THIS CONTROVERSY.
>> Sreenivasan: SHIFTING GEARS
TO THE V.A. SCANDAL.
SUPPORT FOR ERIC SHI SHINSEKI SS
TO BE SLIPPING FROM DEMOCRATS
AND REPUBLICANS.
WAS THE PRESIDENT TOO SLOW IN
DOING SOMETHING ABOUT THIS AS
BOB DOLE SAID TODAY?
>> THE PRESIDENT AND SHINSEKI
SUFFER FROM THE SAME POLITICAL
DISABILITY.
NEITHER ONE IS ABLE TO EMOTE
UPON DEMAND.
ERIC SHI SHINSEKI IS SOMETHING T
DOESN'T BEAT THE TABLE WITH HIS
SHOE AND DOESN'T BEAT HIS CHEST.
HE'S REMARKABLE AMERICAN WITH A
RECORD OF SERVICEO THIS COUNTRY
BASICALLY UNMATCHED, AND THE
FACT THAT HE HASN'T BEEN ANGRY
AS JOHN STEWART AND OTHER
OBSERVERS -- IS THE PRESIDENT
SLOW?
YES, IT SHOULDN'T HAVE BEEN
THERE THREE WEEKS AND THE
RESPONSE ITSELF SEEMED TO BE
ALMOST AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE,
BUT I THINK IT'S CLASSIC
PRESIDENT.
HE WILL WAIT FOR THE REPORT TO
COME IN, EXPANDED THE
INVESTIGATION IN 26 HOSPITALS.
>> THE PRESIDENT SAID IN
MULTIPLE YEARS OVER AND OVER
AGAIN, I'LL FIX THIS PROBLEM.
>> AND I WOULD ARGUE THAT THE
V.A. HAS HAD A MUCH LARGER
MANDATE UNDER THE THIS
ADMINISTRATION AND THIS
SECRETARY.
IT EXTENDED TO ALL THE VICTIMS
OF AGENT ORANGE FROM VIETNAM,
EXPANDED IT TO PTSD.
THE PRESUMPTION IS IF YOU'RE IN
COMBAT, YOU DON'T HAVE TO COME
IN AND PROVE IT ANYM
OBVIOUSLY EXPANDED THE NUMBER OF
PEOPLE BEING COVERED.
AND I'M NOT IN ANY WAY
MINIMIZING.
40 PEOPLE DIED AND HEADS SHOULD
ROLL AND PEOPLE SHOULD BE MORE
ACCOUNTABLE, MAKE NO MISTAKE
ABOUT IT.
THE RECORD OF ACHIEVEMENT AND
HIS RECORD IN PARTICULAR WILL
STAND THE TEST OF TIME.
>> YOU SAID THIS IS THE SCANDAL
THAT WILL STICK WITH THE OBAMA
PRESIDENCY.
IS THIS A LEADERSHIP CRISIS, A
MANAGEMENT CRISIS, A SYSTEMIC
PROBLEM AT THE V.A., IS THERE
SOMEBODY ELSE THAT COULD CLEAN
THIS UP?
>> I THINK IT'S A GOOD QUESTION,
HOW MUCH IS LEADERSHIP.
THERE'S A TEMPTATION TO HAVE
SCAPE GHOST IN THIS KIND --
SCAPEGOATS IN THIS KIND OF
MATTER.
YOU COULD BE GIVEN TOO MANY
RESPONSIBILITIES TO THE
REPUBLICAN INSTITUTION.
THE SYSTEM COULD BE POORLY
DESIGNED.
THIS ONE HASN'T BEEN
FUNDAMENTALLY REFORMED IN A LONG
TIME.
BUT I THINK YOU'VE IDENTIFIED
THE PROBLEM FOR OBAMA IS THERE
HAVE BEEN MANY PROBLEMS OVER
DECADES IN THIS SYSTEM, BUT HE
CAME TO OFFICE IDENTIFYING THIS
AS A PROBLEM, PUTTING
PRESIDENTIAL CREDIBILITY ON THE
LINE SAYING I'M GOING TO FIX
THIS, AND THEN HE APPEARS, LIKE
AT THE PRESS CONFERENCE THAT HE
HAD, AND POSITIONS HIMSELF AS AN
OUTRAGED BYSTANDER.
THAT IS MORE OF A
SELF-INDICTMENT THAN IT IS A
DEFENSE IN A CASE LIKE THIS.
YOU'RE THE PRESIDENT.
YOU'VE HAD FIVE AND A HALF YEARS
TO MAKE A DECISION LIKE THIS.
I THINK THAT'S A RISK.
YOU CAN'T JUST SAY I'M ANGRY.
THEY PUT HIM OUT THERE IN THE
PRESS CONFERENCE TO SAY I'M
ANGRY, BUT YOU HAVE TO HAVE
ANGER PLUS ACTION IN ORDER TO BE
CREDIBLE ON THESE ISSUES AND IT
HASN'T HAPPENED YESTERDAY.
>> THE REPORT IS COMING IN THE
MIDDLE OF NEXT WEEK.
WE'LL SEE WHAT THE PRESIDENT
DOES.
I THINK THIS IS HIS STRENGTH AS
WELL AS HIS SHORTCOMING.
>> MARK SHIELDS, MICHAEL GERSON,
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY TONIGHT,
A BOOK THAT ARGUES FOR THE PLACE
OF ANCIENT PHILOSOPHY IN THE
MODERN WORLD.
JEFF IS BACK WITH A CONVERSATION
HE RECORDED RECENTLY.
>> Brown: OUR NEXT GUEST
TONIGHT, PLATO, THE GREEK
PHILOSOPHER.
WELL, NOT REALLY, BUT WHAT IF HE
WAS ABLE TO JOIN US, OR TO VISIT
GOOGLE TO DISCUSS BRAIN ENGINES
OR DISCUSS BRAIN SCANS WITH THE
LEADING EURO SCIENTISTS, WHAT
INSIGHTS WOULD HE HAVE FOR US.
SUCH QUESTIONS ARE TACKLED IN
THE NEW BOOK, "PLATO AT THE
GOOGLEPLEX:  WHY PHILOSOPHY
WON'T GO AWAY," AUTHOR REBECCA
GOLDSTEIN IS A PHILOSOPHYEST AND
WINNER OF THE McCARTHY AWARD.
GOOD TO HAVE YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
IS THIS TO UNDERSTAND
PHILOSOPHY OR MAKE A CASE FOR
PHILOSOPHY ITSELF?
>> TO MAKE A CASE FO FOR PHILOSY
AND GET CLOSE TO PLATO.
HE'S ELUSIVE.
WE KNOW VERY LITTLE ABOUT THE
MAN HIMSELF.
TO MAKE A CASE FOR PHILOSOPHY, I
WANTED TO GO BACK TO THE
BEGINNING, SO TO THE GREEKS, WHY
DID THEY DO IT, WHY DID PLATO DO
IT?
WHO IS HE, WHO ARE THEY AND HOW
SIMILAR ARE WE TO THEM.
>> Brown: THAT'S WHAT YOU DID.
YOU PUT HIM INTO OUR WORLD.
>> YES, I THINK THERE ARE GREAT
SIMILARITIES BETWEEN OUR SOCIETY
AND THE ATHENNIAN SOCIETY.
THE BEGINNING OF PHILOSOPHY AND
SCIENCE AND HISTORY AND ABSTRACT
MATHEMATICS.
IT'S AN ACHIEVEMENT-ORIENTED
SOCIETY.
THEY HAD A POLYTHEISTIC RELIGION
AND THEIR SOCIETY WAS SATURATED
WITH RELIGIOUS RITUALS, BUT WHEN
IT CAME TO THE QUESTION OF WHAT
IS LIFE ALL ABOUT, DO WE MATTER,
DO WE HAVE TO DO SOMETHING IN
ORDER TO MATTER, THEY ATTACKED
IT IN VERY SECULAR TERMS, AND WE
ARE INCREASINGLY
POST-MONOTHEISTIC WHEN WE THINK
ABOUT OUR LIVES AND WHAT IS IT
TO LIVE THE GOOD LIFE, WHAT IS
IT TO LIVE A LIFE THAT'S
FULFILLING, MOST OF US THINK OF
IT IN MOST-THEO LOGIC CONCERNS.
>> Brown: YOU PUT PLATO INTO
CREATING CONVERSATIONS, DIALOGS
AS PLATO DID FOR HIS ORIGINAL
CHARACTER.
SOCRATES.
>> SOCRATES.
>> Brown: WAS THAT FUN FOR YOU
TO DO?
>> IT WAS A LOT OF WORK.
FIRST OF ALL, I REALLY WANTED TO
SOAK UP THE CULTURE, SO I DIDN'T
JUST READ AND MEMORIZE THE
26th DIALOGUE, BUT ALL OF THE
CULTURAL ARTIFACTS, YOU KNOW,
THE POETRY OF "THE TRAGEDY "TO
TRY TO GET A SENSE OF WHAT IT
WAS LIKE.
BECAUSE AS YOU SAY HE CREATES
THIS CHARACTER H HIPOCRATES, BUT
WHO IS PLATO?
>> Brown: YOU HAVE HIM VISIT A
NEUROSCIENTIST AND GET A BRAIN
SCAN.
WHAT ARE YOU EXPLORING IN A
SCENE LIKE THAT?
>> THE FIRST PLACE I BRING THEM
IS GOOGLE.
>> Brown: YES.
AND HE GETS A CHROME BOOK AND
IS ADDICTED TO THE INTERNET.
SO HE GETS BROUGHT UP TO SPEED
VERY FAST INTO OUR WORLD.
>> Brown: I LOVE WHEN HE
VISITS THE CABLE TELEVISION
BECAUSE I WOULD LOVE TO HAVE HIM
AT THE TABLE.
>> ONE OF THE GREAT
PHILOSOPHICAL QUESTIONS OF OUR
DAY IS, YOU KNOW, SCIENCE IS
FINDING OUT WHAT IF THE MATERIAL
SUBSTRATES OF OUR MINDS IS NOT
ANSWERING THE QUESTIONS.
THE QUESTION OF WILL, PERSONAL
RESPONSIBILITY, PERSONAL
IDENTITY.
IIN OUR BRAIN THAT CONSISTS OF
SYNAPSES --
>> Brown: IN NEUROSCIENCE, THE
BRAIN TELLS US ALL.
>> EXACTLY.
THINGS LIKE AM I RESPONSIBLE FOR
MY ACTIONS, THAT'S ALL GOING ON.
SO THE ADVANCES IN SCIENCE HAS
MADE PHILOSOPHY INEVITABLE.
YOU KNOW, WE HAVE TO --
>> Brown: WAIT A MINUTE,
INEVITABLE, OR SOME PEOPLE WOULD
SAY IT WOULD BECOME IRRELEVANT
IN ANOTHER WAY BECAUSE IF THAT'S
ALL ANSWERED MATERIALLY, WHAT'S
LEFT?
YOU'RE MAKING A CASE PHILOSOPHY
STILL HAS THIS DEEP REEL
VANITIES.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
PLATO GETS INTO A CONVERSATION
WITH THIS NEUROSCIENTIST, TWO OF
THEM, ACTUALLY, AND HE IS
TURNING TO THE INSTANT RESULTS
WE HAVE SO FAR, IS IT ANSWERING
ALL THE QUESTIONS I ASKED ABOUT
PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY,
PERSONAL IDENTITY, ABOUT WHO
WELL WIE REALLY ARE?
ARE PEOPLE JUMPING THE GUN,
MAKING TOO MUCH OF THESE
SCIENTIFIC RESULTS, AS IMPORTANT
AS THEY ARE.
AND I THINK AND PLATO THINKS THE
ROLE OF PHILOSOPHY IS OFTEN TO
MEDIATE BETWEEN OUR SCIENTIFIC
IM-- YOU KNOW, WHAT WE'RE
GETTING OF OURSELVES AS IT'S
REFLECTED IN OUR SIGN TERRIFIC
STUDIES, AND THE KINDS OF OTHER
IDEAS WE NEED IN ORDER TO LIVE
COHERENT LIVES, LIKE THIS IS MY
LIFE AND I'M RESPONSIBLE FOR
THIS LIFE.
CAN WE RECONCILE THAT WITH WHAT
WE'RE LEARNING FROM SCIENCE?
AND THAT'S, I THINK, VERY MUCH
THE ROLE OF PHILOSOPHY AND THAT
IS WHAT PLATO IS TRYING TO DO
WHEN HE GOES TO THE
NEUROSCIENTIFIC LAB.
>> Brown: LET ME ASK YOU,
FINALLY, ARE YOU MAKING AN
ARGUMENT TORE THE CONTINUED
VALUEO DEEP THOUGHT AND
PHILOSOPHY AND THE HUMANITIES
MORE GENERALLY, ARE YOU AFRAID
THAT'S BEING LOST, THAT
SOMETHING IMPORTANT IS BEING
LOST TODAY?
>> YES, I THINK THE HUMANITIES
ARE FLOUNDERING TO A CERTAIN
EXTENT, AND MANY WHO ARE SAYING
THEY STALL THEMSELVES ON THE
SCIENCES.
I THINK THAT'S A MISTAKE.
I THINK THE HUMANITIES HAVE TO
TAKE SCIENCE, THE GREAT
KNOWLEDGE WE GET FROM SCIENCE
INTO ACCOUNT, BUT THEN TRY TO
ANSWER THE HUMAN QUESTIONS AND
TRY TO MAKE SENSE OUT OF OUR
LIVES, TAKING INTO ACCOUNT ALL
OF THE SCIENTIFIC KNOWLEDGE.
SO I'M AFRAID THAT THAT BIG
PICTURE AND THAT PICTURE OF SORT
OF RECONCILIATION BETWEEN THESE
DIFFERENT IMAGES THAT WE HAVE IS
BEING LOST.
>> Brown: "PLATO AT THE
GOOGLEPLEX:  WHY PHILOSOPHY
WON'T GO AWAY."
REBECCA, THANK YOU SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
NEW FIGHTING ERUPTED IN EASTERN
UKRAINE, TWO DAYS BEFORE A
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION.
RUSSIAN LEADER VLADIMIR PUTIN
BRANDED THE CONFLICT A "CIVIL
WAR."
SYRIAN T.V. REPORTED 39 PEOPLE
KILLED AND 200 WOUNDED IN A
MORTAR ATTACK ON A RALLY FOR
PRESIDENT ASSAD.
AND, A CORRECTION TO A STORY WE
AIRED LAST NIGHT ABOUT LIVING ON
THE MINIMUM WAGE.
AIRPORT RAMP WORKER JOSH VINA
DOES NOT MOVE BAGGAGE FOR ALASKA
AIRLINES; HE EARNS $9.50 AN HOUR
DOING THAT WORK FOR OTHER
CLIENTS OF HIS EMPLOYER, MENZIES
AVIATION.
ON THE NEWSHOUR ONLINE RIGHT
NOW, WE CONTINUE OUR LOOK AT
"CAPITAL," THE BEST-SELLING, AND
CONTROVERSIAL, BOOK A
INEQUALITY.
ECONOMIST
THOMAS PIKETTY RESPONDS TO HIS
CRITICS IN AN INTERVIEW WITH
PAUL SOLMAN.
YOU CAN READ THEIR CONVERSATION
ON "MAKING SENSE."
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
AND A REMINDER ABOUT SOME
UPCOMING PROGRAMS FROM
OUR PBS COLLEAGUES.
GWEN IFILL IS PREPARING FOR
"WASHINGTON WEEK," WHICH AIRS
LATER THIS EVENING.
HERE'S A PREVIEW: